# MVP - Authentication, Authorization, and Encryption

**Feature Name:** MVP - Authentication, Authorization, and Encryption \
**Status**: In Progress \
**Start Date**: 2022-07-11 \
**Authors**: emilbon99 \
**Jira
Issue**: [DA-182 - Authentication & Authorization Requirements and RFC](https://arya-analytics.atlassian.net/browse/DA-182) \
**Requirements
Doc**: [00 - Security](https://arya-analytics.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AA/pages/11501576/00+-+Security)

# Summary and Motivation

In this RFC I propose a design for an authentication, authorization, and encryption
service for delta. A well crafted security system is essential for any enterprise
control system. Delta may be used in both public or private networks, distributing
sensitive and operation critical data between its nodes and to its clients. A
security breach could, in the worst cases, result in the loss of millions of dollars
of hardware or even life.

Unfortunately, designing a secure system is a challenge. Keeping up to date with
best practices, searching for and eliminating vulnerabilities, and implementing
granular access controls is a daunting task.

Delta's security system targets three key areas of concern:

1. Authentication - Is an entity (node, user, other software) who they say they are?
2. Authorization - Does an entity have permission to access or modify the requested
   resource?
3. Encryption - Is all communication between entities unreadable by outside parties?

The MVP implementation defines key interfaces to cover these areas of concern in a
modular pattern, while providing rudimentary implementations underneath. The idea is to
keep ourselves from binding to specific authentication, authorization, or encryption
paradigms (e.g OAuth2, LDAp, RBAC, ABAC, ACL, etc.), and instead use a generic interface
that can be replaced or expanded for different configurations or future iterations.

# Design

## Authentication

All authentication in Delta is done using a `Credentials` payload:

```go
package irrelivant

type Credentials struct {
	Username string
	Password string
}

type Authenticator interface {
	Authenticate(cred Credentials) error
}

```

If the combination is not valid, `Authenticate` will return an error, letting the caller
know it's not safe to proceed with those credentials. It's common to see an interface
that looks more like this

```go
package irrelivant

type Authenticator interface {
	Authenticate(cred Credentials) (User, error)
}
```

The `Authenticate` method returns both a user object and an error. Delta's authenticator
intentionally does not follow this pattern. It is not the responsibility of the
authenticator to store or retrieve any user related data; its only job is to ensure
that a user with those credentials does in fact exist. The caller is responsible for
fetching any user related data after authentication is successful. This is, of
course, dependent on the username being unique.

The Authenticator interface can be implemented by a variety of different systems such as
LDAP, OAuth2, or a cluster internal system. Multiple authenticators can be integrated
into a chain of responsibility, where credentials are checked until an authenticator
either approves the credentials or the chain is exhausted.

This interface can also be extended in future iterations to support certificate-based
authentication and more.

## Authorization

An effective authorization interface is difficult to define. Delta aims to support
access control models like RBA, ABAC, ACL, LDAP, and more. It's difficult to come up
with a single authorization interface between Delta and these models.

### Policy and Pattern Case Studies

I'd like to start by examining authorization and access patterns that may be useful
to implement in Delta. The idea is to explore how a user may structure their access
control system, how these structures relate to common authorization models, and,
finally, the different ways in which Delta can support these patterns. The following
case studies use some simple set notation to describe their details. The notation
defines a key-value pair.

#### Write Access to Channels

This is perhaps the most common, and most important access control policy in Delta:
*Who can send commands or write data to a particular channel?*

The most simple pattern here is to bind channel access to particular users in some sort
of access control list represented as a set of order triples:

$$

\set{\text{User1, User2, User3}} \times \text{Write} \times \set{\text{Chan1, Chan2, Chan3}}



$$

Where $W$ represents write access to a particular entity. It's important to note 
that we can define an individual permission or access policy as the ordered triple

$$
(\text{User1},\text{Write},\text{Chan1})
$$

Where $\text{User1}$ represents a subject, $W(\text{Chan1})$ represents write access
to the resource. More abstractly, we can represent the permission as

$$
(\text{S}, \text{A}, \text{R})
$$

Where $\text{S}$ represents the subject, $\text{R}$ represents the resource, and
$\text{A}$ represents the action.

Defining access policies at the 'triplet' level provides close control, but requires 
a lot of effort to define permissions for each user and channel pair. We can fix this by 
defining a 'group' or 'role' subject that represents a collection of users that have 
write access to a particular channel.

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{Beatles} = \set{\text{John, Ringo, Paul, George}} \\
\text{Beatles] \times \text{Write} \times \set{\text{Chan1, Chan2, Chan3}}
\end{align*}
$$

We can apply the same pattern to define a group of channels.

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{Instruments} = \set{\text{Piano, Guitar, Drums, Bass}} \\
\text{Beatles} \times \text{Write} \times \text{Instruments}
\end{align*}
$$



permissions for every single channel or user. We can fix this by defining a 'group' or
'role' entity, where both represent a collection of subjects that have write access
to a particular channel.

$$ \text{Group1} = \set{\text{User1, User2, User3}} $$

Now we can define the permission $ \text{Group1} \to \text{Chan1} $.

The following design extracts the common principles between these authorization
models into a set of data containers that can be defined and defined within Delta
and provide to specific authorization implementations.

Delta's authorization systems consist of three elements:

1. Resource - An entity that can be accessed and changed by a subject performing an
   action. A file, database table, or row are good examples of resources.
2. Action - An operation that results in access or modification to a resource by a
   subject. Writing (action) to a file (resource) and inserting (action) a row (
   resource)
   are good examples of actions.
3. Subject - An entity that executes actions on a resource. A user, a role, or a node
   are good examples of subjects.

### Resource

Delta represents resources as virtual paths within a larger resource tree. For example,
a channel collecting strain gauge data could be represented by the path "/ch/sg/01'
where:

1. "/" is the root of the resource tree. All resources are children of this resource.
2. "/channel" contains all of Delta's channels.
3. "/channel/sg" contains all of Delta's strain gauge channels.

The final element of the path, "01" is a unique key for the resource within its parent.
This means that the final path is unique within the resource tree.

A resource can be identified by multiple paths. For example, channel
"/ch/sg/01" can also be identified as "/dev/daq/01/ch/05" to show that it is the
fifth channel belonging to the first data acquisition device. This allows a user to
implement virtually any resource scheme they want to, although specific access control
models can restrict how these paths are assembled. 
